This animation explains requirements for accessible
toilet rooms in the ADA and ABA Standards.
Accessible toilet rooms must be on an accessible
route and have compliant doors so that people
with disabilities, including those who use
wheelchairs, can enter the space.
Required clearances provide sufficient room
to enter, clear the door, turn around, and
close and lock the door.
The clear floor space required at water closets
accommodates a variety of transfers, including
side transfers.
Transfer techniques vary among users based
on personal preferences and abilities, room
layout, and other factors.
Grab bars on the side and rear walls are critical
for transfer.
Flush controls must be located on the open
side of the water closet.
Clearances are also required at lavatories
and other elements, including soap dispensers,
towel dispensers, and hand dryers.
The Standards include criteria for the usability
of faucet controls and other operable parts.
Door maneuvering clearances provide room to
approach and open doors and to exit the space.
The size of single-user toilet rooms is determined
by room layout, configuration of fixtures,
the swing of doors, and other factors.
Water closets can be located in any corner
of the room so that one side is open and unobstructed.
The lavatory must be located outside the water
closet clearance.
This keeps the space beside the water closet
open for side transfers.
The lavatory clear floor space, however, can
overlap the water closet clearance.
Lavatories can be recessed so that they remain
outside the water closet clearance.
To accommodate this configuration, the rear
grab bar at the water closet is permitted
to be shortened from 36 inches to 24 inches
minimum.
The maneuvering clearance required at doors
is configured according to the swing and approach.
This space must be clear of any obstructions
but can overlap other clearances.
Doors can swing into fixture clearances only
if clear floor space at least 30 by 48 inches
is available beyond the swing.
This ensures sufficient space to clear the
door when entering the room.
The location and orientation of this space
is not further specified, but it should be
positioned so that it can be easily accessed.
Turning space is required within the room.
Turning space must be either a 60-inch diameter
circle or T-shaped.
This space can overlap fixture and door maneuvering
clearances.
Doors can swing into the turning space under
any condition.
Rooms with doors that swing out usually can
be smaller since less maneuvering clearance
is required on the push side of doors.
On the push side, a strike side clearance
of at least 12 inches is required for a forward
approach if the door has both a closer and
latch.
Otherwise, no strike side clearance is required
on the push side.
Where doors swing out, turning space may further
determine the minimum size of the room.
Lavatories and other fixtures with knee and
toe space can overlap a portion of the turning
space.
These requirements apply to all types of room
layouts.
For example, in the case of a room with a
lavatory opposite the water closet, the same
requirements apply, including:
Minimum clearances at the water closet and
the lavatory, and any other provided fixtures;
Door maneuvering clearance unobstructed by
any fixtures;
Location of the door swing outside fixture
clearances (unless wheelchair space beyond
the door swing is provided in the room); and
Turning space, which can overlap fixture and
door clearances and the arc of the door swing.
These requirements apply equally to other
layouts.
In this example, the door swing can overlap
fixture clearances because wheelchair space
is available beyond the door swing.
Access is required to multi-user toilet rooms
where provided, even if other accessible restrooms
are available.
At least one lavatory must be accessible.
A compliant urinal is required where more
than one urinal is provided.
At least one toilet compartment must be wheelchair
accessible in all multi-user restrooms.
The compartment opening is offset from the
water closet to provide space for entry and
positioning for transfer.
Toe clearance below one side partition and
the front partition provides additional maneuvering
space.
A second compartment is required in rooms
with six or more toilet compartments or a
combined total of six or more compartments
and urinals.
This compartment is designed for people with
disabilities who are ambulatory.
It features a self-closing door that swings
out and parallel grab bars that provide support
on both sides.
Further guidance on accessible toilet rooms
and other requirements in the ADA and ABA
Standards is available from the U.S. Access
Board.
This animation was developed by the U.S. Access
Board in cooperation with the federal agencies
that issue the ADA and ABA Standards.